DBridge: A Program Rewrite Tool for Set-Oriented
Query Execution
Mahendra Chavan # , Ravindra Guravannavar ∗ , Karthik Ramachandra # , S. Sudarshan #
#

Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay

{mahcha, karthiksr, sudarsha}@cse.iitb.ac.in
∗

Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
ravig@iith.ac.in

Abstract— We present DBridge, a novel static analysis and
program transformation tool to optimize database access. Traditionally, rewrite of queries and programs are done independently,
by the database query optimzier and the language compiler respectively, leaving out many optimization opportunities. Our tool
aims to bridge this gap by performing holistic transformations,
which include both program and query rewrite.
Many applications invoke database queries multiple times with
different parameter values. Such query invocations made using
imperative loops are often the cause of poor performance due to
random I/O and round trip delays. In practice, such performance
issues are addressed by manually rewriting the application to
make it set oriented. Such manual rewriting of programs is
often time consuming and error prone. Guravannavar et. al.[1]
propose program analysis and transformation techniques for
automatically rewriting an application to make it set oriented.
DBridge implements these program transformation techniques
for Java programs that use JDBC to access database.
In this demonstration, we showcase the holistic program/query
transformations that DBridge can perform, over a variety of
scenarios taken from real-world applications. We then walk
through the design of DBridge, which uses the SOOT optimization framework for static analysis. Finally, we demonstrate the
performance gains achieved through the transformations.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Database applications perform queries and updates from
within procedural code that encodes business logic. Such
applications use a mix of procedural constructs and SQL, and
can run either inside the database system, as stored procedures,
or outside the database system, as external programs. In such
applications, iterative execution of parameterized queries is
often the main cause of poor performance as it leads to random
I/O and network round-trip delays.
The importance of set oriented execution is well known
in the context of nested subqueries. Query decorrelation [2],
[3], [4] addresses the problem of iterative execution of nested
subqueries, by rewriting them using set operations such as
joins. Thus, decorrelation enables set oriented plans with
reduced random I/O. However, decorrelation techniques are
not directly applicable to imperative program loops. Guravannavar et. al.[1] propose a program transformation approach
for rewriting applications to use batched parameter bindings,
thereby enabling set oriented execution of database queries.
The key idea proposed by Guravannavar et. al.[1] is to
replace repeated invocations of a query with a single call to
the batched form or set oriented form of the query, which

is often far more efficient than iterative invocation of the
original query. To this end, Guravannavar et. al.[1] propose
a set of program transformation rules which can be used to
automatically rewrite a given program loop containing query
invocation statements. The transformation rules make use of
information about inter-statement data dependencies gathered
from static analysis of the program. The proposed program
transformation rules are powerful enough to rewrite a large
class of loops involving complex control flow and arbitrary
level of nesting.
DBridge is a program transformation tool based on the techniques presented in [1]. DBridge works on Java applications
that use JDBC API [5] to access database. The tool performs
static analysis of the input program and identifies opportunities
for replacing iterative database access with set oriented access;
it then rewrites the application code and the embedded queries
together for set oriented processing. DBridge is designed to
be a source-to-source transformation tool, and to this end,
it ensures readability and maintainability of the transformed
code. The tool is thus best suited for integration into an
application development environment (IDE). DBridge can also
be used as a preprocessing step inside a language compiler,
thus making the compiler “database access aware”.
II. OVERVIEW OF DB RIDGE
As an illustration of the kind of transformations DBridge
can perform, consider the Java program snippet shown in
Example 1.
Connection con = DriverManager.getConnection(url);
PreparedStatement pstmt = con.prepare(
”SELECT count(partkey) FROM part WHERE category=?”);
while(category != -1) {
pstmt.setInt(1, category);
ResultSet rs = pstmt.executeQuery();
if (rs.next()) {
partCount = rs.getInt(0);
total += partCount;
}
category = getParent(category);
}
Example 1: A Program Snippet with JDBC Calls

Connection con = DriverManager.getConnection(dbrUrl);
PreparedStatement pstmt = con.prepare(
”SELECT count(partkey) FROM part WHERE category=?”);
while(category != -1) {
pstmt.setInt(1, category);
pstmt.addBatch();
category = getParent(category);
}
pstmt.executeBatch();
while (pstmt.getMoreResults()) {
ResultSet rs = pstmt.getResultSet();
if (rs.next()) {
partCount = rs.getInt(0);
total += partCount;
}
}
Example 2: JDBC Example after Transformation
The program computes the total number of parts in a
given category and all its parent categories. Note the repeated
execution of a parameterized aggregate query inside the while
loop. The program snippet after transformation by DBridge
is shown in Example 2. The transformed code is a result of
the application of several transformation rules. We give an
overview of some of the important transformations with the
help of the example.
Statement Reordering: DBridge applies a set of transformation rules to reorder the statements within the loop body, so as
to permit set oriented execution. In Example 2, note that the
statement invoking getParent, is moved up ahead of the query
execution. Statement reordering is performed taking interstatement data dependencies into account. DBridge can also
introduce temporary variables to break certain inter-statement
data dependencies that otherwise prohibit set oriented execution; see [1], [6] for details.
Loop Splitting: This is the key transformation, described in
[1] to enable set oriented execution. In Example 2, the loop in
the original program is split into two parts. The first loop in
the transformed program generates all the parameter bindings.
Next, a rewritten form of the query is executed to obtain results
for all the parameter bindings together. Then, the second
loop executes statements that depend on the query results.
The loop splitting transformation has certain preconditions
for its applicability [1], and may require prior application of
statement reordering so that the preconditions are met.
In general, the body of a loop may contain more than one
parameterized query. Repeated application of the loop splitting
transformation allows batching of any number of queries that
lie inside the loop.
Query Rewrite: After collecting all the parameter bindings,
the program calls the executeBatch method, which internally
transforms the query statement into a set oriented form, which
is often more efficient. For example, the scalar aggregate query
in the example would be transformed into the following query,
where pb is a temporary table in which the parameter bindings
are materialized.

SELECT pb.category, le.c1
FROM pbatch pb,
OUTER APPLY (SELECT count(partkey) as c1
FROM part
WHERE category=pb.category) le;
The rewritten query uses the OUTER APPLY construct of
Microsoft SQL Server but can instead be written using a left
outer join combined with the LATERAL construct of SQL:99.
Most widely used database systems can unnest such a query
into a form that uses joins or outer joins [4]. For example, the
unnested form of the above query could be:
SELECT pb.category, count(partkey)
FROM pbatch pb LEFT OUTER JOIN part p
ON pb.category=p.category
GROUP BY pb.category;
Such a rewriting enables the use of efficient set oriented
query processing algorithms such as hash or merge join.
In Example 2, note the use of a different JDBC URL
(dbrUrl) in the transformed program. DBridge wraps JDBC
API in order to perform query rewrite as described above. The
query rewrite is performed within DBrdge’s implementation of
the executeBatch method.
Rewrite of Conditional Blocks: DBridge can deal with
conditional control transfer statements (if-then-else), and query
execution statements inside conditional blocks. DBridge also
handles order-sensitive operations within the loop correctly.
Order-sensitive operations are operations whose order of execution is important for the correctness of the program. We
illustrate these two features using Example 3. The program,
after transformation, is shown in Example 4.
while(category != -1) {
if(isActive(category)) {
pstmt.bind(1, category);
rs = pstmt.executeQuery();
rs.next();
partCount = rs.getInt(0);
total += partCount;
print(category, partCount);
}
category = getParent(category);
}
Example 3: Queries inside Conditional Blocks
DBridge first transforms conditional blocks into a sequence
of guarded statements by introducing a boolean variable to
remember the branching decision. It then applies the loop
splitting transformation and replaces repeated execution of
the query with a single invocation of its set oriented form.
Finally, the sequence of guarded statements are merged back
to have conditional blocks, as can be seen in the second loop
of Example 4.
Queries, being side-effect free, can be executed in any order
of the parameter bindings. However, the loop can contain other

LoopContextTable ctx;
while(category != -1) {
boolean f = isActive(category);
if(f) {
pstmt.bind(1, category);
pstmt.addBatch();
}
tempCat = category;
category = getParent(category);
ctx.addRecord(new Record(loopKey, f, tempCat));
}
pstmt.executeBatch();
// Now, read all the results and augment ctx with a new
// column partCount to hold the part count for each category.
ctx.mergeResults(pstmt);
for (Record r: ctx) { // We assume ctx to be an ordered table
if(r.f) {
total += r.partCount;
print(r.tempCat, r.partCount);
}
}

It is not always possible to transform every query execution statement within a loop into a statement that
uses set oriented form of the query. Inter-statement data
dependencies may prohibit such a rewrite. The transformation rules and statement reordering algorithm which
DBridge uses are powerful enough to transform a large
number of the identified opportunities for set orientation.
In fact, in [6] we prove the following: the transformation
rules, together with our statement reordering algorithm
can transform every query execution statement that does
not have a cyclic data dependency on itself. Intuitively,
DBridge can transform all iterative query execution statements except those such as the ones used for computing
transitive closure of a relation.
•

Example 4: Transformation of Example 3
order-sensitive operations, which must be executed in the same
order as in the original program. To ensure this, the loop
splitting transformation of DBridge maintains the loop context
in an ordered table, and iterates over the loop context records
in the order in which they are produced (see Example 4).
Nested Loops: A query execution statement can be inside a
loop, which is nested within another loop. DBridge works with
arbitrary levels of loop nesting. We omit an example in the
interest of space, but include it as a case in the demonstration.
III. S YSTEM D ESIGN AND I MPLEMENTATION
DBridge is designed to meet the following requirements:
• Semantics Preservation: For a program transformation
tool like DBridge, ensuring correctness is a strict requirement. DBridge ensures that the transformed program is
equivalent in its functionality to the original program.
DBridge’s transformations are based on a set of formally
defined equivalence rules, whose correctness proofs can
be found in [6].
•

Robustness: In our context, robustness is the ability of
the tool to accommodate various kinds of programs, to
successfully identify opportunities for set orientation, and
to transform them. DBridge can deal with a variety of
procedural language constructs, such as variable assignments, conditional control transfer, loops, method calls
and field dereferences. Work to support exceptions is in
progress. Further, DBridge employs inter-procedural data
flow analysis to find data dependencies between program
statements caused due to inter-procedural reads/writes.
These abilities make DBridge applicable for a large
number of real-world programs.

Readability: Programmers may need to read the transformed code to debug a program, or even to gain confidence in the correctness of the transformed code. Therefore, maintaining readability of the transformed code is
very important. We achieve this goal through several
measures. For instance, when we rewrite conditional
blocks and then split a loop, the resulting code will
have many guarded statements. We therefore introduce
a pass where such guarded statements are grouped back
in each of the two generated loops, so that the resulting
code resembles the original code. Further, the transformed
program uses standard JDBC calls, and contains very few
calls to the DBridge runtime library.

Extensibility: DBridge is designed in a way that provides
an elegant framework for introducing new transformation
rules or extending existing rules. Each rule is encapsulated as an object, and all the information necessary to
apply a rule is provided by the framework via the program
dependence graph.
The important phases in the program transformation process
are shown in Figure 1. The input Java source file is first
converted into an intermediate representation, on which we
perform data flow analysis. Using this analysis, we construct
a Dependence Graph, which is the basic data structure on
which our transformation rules rely. The main task of our
program transformation tool appears in the Apply Trans Rules
•

Source Java
File

Parsing and
Conversion to
Interm Rep

Intermediate
Code (Jimple)

Dataflow
Analysis

Def−Use
Information

DDG
Construction

Target Java
File

Decompile

Modified
Jimple Code

Apply Trans
Rules

Dependence
Graph

Fig. 1.

Program Transformation Phases

Compute Dependence Graph
Find a candidate for Batching

Merge sequence of guarded
statements to condition blocks

Convert conditional blocks to
sequence of guarded statements
Rewrite query in
Set Oriented form

Reorder Statements

Split the loop
Fig. 2.

Iterative application of Transformation rules

phase. The program transformation rules are applied in an
iterative manner, updating the dataflow information each time
the code changes. The rule application process stops when
all (or the user chosen) query execution statements within
loops are transformed into their corresponding set oriented
forms. Once all the transformations are done, the intermediate
representation is converted back to a target Java source file.
Applying Transformation rules
The program transformation rules presented in [6] can be
applied repeatedly to refine a given program. Applying a rule
to a program involves substituting a program fragment that
matches the antecedent (LHS) of the rule with the program
fragment instantiated by the consequent (RHS) of the rule.
Some rules facilitate the application of other rules and together
achieve the goal of batching a desired statement w.r.t. a loop.
In DBridge, the transformation rules are applied iteratively
as shown in Figure 2. A query execution statement present
within a loop body is considered as a candidate for batching,
and for each such candidate, the rules are applied. First,
conditional blocks if any, are converted into a sequence of
guarded statements as explained through Example 3. Then
the statement reordering algorithm is run, which enables loop
splitting. The query is then rewritten into a set oriented form.
Finally, the control structure of the program is restored by
merging back guarded statements into conditional blocks,
leading to a program with a set oriented query execution
statement which lies outside the loop body.
Choice of technologies
Java with JDBC is one of the most widely used platform
to build database applications. The JDBC API is the standard
mode of connecting to a database from a Java program. Object
relational mapping tools such as Hibernate provide a higher
level of abstraction than JDBC, but internally use JDBC itself.
So, by handling JDBC based programs, we cover a large class
of database applications.
The availability of Soot [7], a powerful static analysis tool
for Java, has also been a compelling reason to choose Java for
developing this tool. Soot provides a convenient intermediate
representation called Jimple, and also performs data flow

analysis which enables us to compute inter-statement data
dependencies.
IV. D EMONSTRATIONS
We demonstrate the working of DBridge using a number of
programs, some of them taken from real-world applications,
which faced performance problems. These applications include
an employee stock option management system and an endof-day processing system in a government organization. We
also show the impact of using DBridge on publicly available
benchmark applications [8], which model real world systems
such as an auction system modeled after ebay.com, a bulletin
board system modeled after slashdot.org. These programs
highlight the applicability of DBridge, and also demonstrate
the resulting gains in performance.
Along with programs such as Example 1, we demonstrate
the transformation of (a) programs with nested loops, (b)
programs with conditional blocks (Example 3), (c) programs
that perform a series of INSERTs into ones that performs
BULK INSERTs.
We have tested DBridge on a variety of Java programs in
order to evaluate (a) its applicability for real world applications
and (b) the performance gains that could be achieved by using
such a tool. We have observed that, by the use of the sound
techniques of reordering and other rules, DBridge can exploit
most of the potential opportunities for batching, even though
they are not explicit in the program. For the above mentioned
benchmark applications, DBridge was able to transform a
significant number of the opportunities. Our evaluation, which
has been conducted on multiple database systems, shows
performance gains achieved by the transformed programs to
the extent of about 70% in several cases. The details of the
evaluation are available in [6].
V. C ONCLUSION
We present DBridge, a tool that combines program and
query transformations to make query execution set oriented.
We highlight challenges in building such a tool, and briefly
outline how we addressed them. Using complex real-world
programs we demonstrate the transformation capabilities of
DBridge, and the potential performance gains due to such
transformations.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Guravannavar and S. Sudarshan, “Rewriting Procedures for Batched
Bindings,” in Intl. Conf. on Very Large Databases, 2008.
[2] W. Kim, “On Optimizing an SQL-like Nested Query,” in ACM Trans. on
Database Systems, Vol 7, No.3, 1982.
[3] P. Seshadri, H. Pirahesh, and T. C. Leung, “Complex Query Decorrelation,” in Intl. Conf. on Data Engineering, 1996.
[4] M. Elhemali, C. A. Galindo-Legaria, T. Grabs, and M. M. Joshi, “Execution Strategies for SQL Subqueries,” in ACM SIGMOD, 2007.
[5] “Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) API
http://java.sun.com/products/jdbc/overview.html.”
[6] R. Guravannavar, “Optimization and evaluation of nested queries and
procedures,” Ph.D. dissertation, IIT Bombay, 2009.
[7] “Soot: A Java Optimization Framework.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.sable.mcgill.ca/soot
[8] “ObjectWeb Consortium-JMOB (Java middleware open benchmarking).”
[Online]. Available: http://jmob.ow2.org/

